feat: How to deploy Eclipse Che on mininkube with Keycloak as OIDC pr… (#2408)
codenvy/che-docs: modules/administration-guide/pages/installing-che-on-minikube-keycloak-oidc.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
:navtitle: Installing {prod-short} on Minikube with {identity-provider} as OIDC Identity Provider
:description: Installing {prod-short} on Minikube with {identity-provider} as OIDC Identity Provider
:keywords: overview, installing-che-on-minikube-keycloak-oidc
:page-aliases: installation-guide:installing-che-on-minikube-keycloak-oidc, overview:installing-che-on-minikube-keycloak-oidc

[id="installing-{prod-id-short}-on-minikube-keycloak-oidc_{context}"]
= Installing {prod-short} on Minikube with {identity-provider} as OIDC Identity Provider

This article explains how to create a single-node {kubernetes} cluster with Minikube to deploy {prod-short} and

> configure it to use {identity-provider} as OIDC identity provider.

Reviewer: Since this article is specific to minikube + keycloak, does it make sense to avoid the template fields? With the wrong values, this could turn into an article that refers to minikube with OpenShift version X or higher, using `oc` instead of `kubectl`.

Author: We have a similar doc about deploy Eclipse Che on minikube [1] with templates instead of hardcoded values.
So, I think we don't have to care much.
/cc @max-cx 

[1] https://github.com/eclipse-che/che-docs/blob/70783006917dab18651d0e9a274b98b0a176c47b/modules/administration-guide/pages/installing-che-on-minikube.adoc#L39-L38

> configure it to use {identity-provider} as OIDC identity provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configure it to use {identity-provider} as the OIDC identity provider.
```

    nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/ssl-redirect: 'true'
spec:
  tls:
    - hosts:
        - keycloak.$(minikube ip).nip.io
      secretName: keycloak.tls
  rules:
  - host: keycloak.$(minikube ip).nip.io
    http:
      paths:
      - path: /
        pathType: Prefix
        backend:
          service:
            name: keycloak
            port:
              number: 8080
EOF
----

. Save {identity-provider} CA certificate:
+
[subs="+attributes"]
----
$ {orch-cli} get secret ca.crt -o "jsonpath={.data['ca\.crt']}" -n keycloak | base64 -d > keycloak-ca.crt
----

. Copy {identity-provider} CA certificate into `minikube`:
+
----
$ minikube ssh sudo "mkdir -p /etc/ca-certificates" && \
  minikube cp keycloak-ca.crt /etc/ca-certificates/keycloak-ca.crt
----

. Configure `minikube` to use {identity-provider} as OIDC identity provider:
+
----
$ minikube start \
    --extra-config=apiserver.oidc-issuer-url=https://keycloak.$(minikube ip).nip.io/realms/che \
    --extra-config=apiserver.oidc-username-claim=email \
    --extra-config=apiserver.oidc-client-id=k8s-client \
    --extra-config=apiserver.oidc-ca-file=/etc/ca-certificates/keycloak-ca.crt

> ----

Reviewer: Just to double check -- this works even without `minikube stop` first?

Author: Right, `minikube stop` is not needed.

> . Configure {identity-provider} to create realm, client and user:

Reviewer: Does this step have to be performed every time minikube is started? If so that may be worth mentioning.

Author: Exactly, since keycloak uses embedded DB.
That's why I put keycloak configuration step after configuring minikube api server.

Reviewer: My thinking is that there should be a note on this step along the lines of
> Note: this step has to be performed every time the minikube cluster is started

Currently, what will happen if the user e.g. restarts their laptop is that everything else will come back up but keycloak will not be configured, which could be confusing.

:_content-type: PROCEDURE

> :navtitle: Installing {prod-short} on Minikube with {identity-provider} as OIDC Identity Provider

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:navtitle: Installing {prod-short} on Minikube with {identity-provider} as the OIDC provider
```

> :description: Installing {prod-short} on Minikube with {identity-provider} as OIDC Identity Provider

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:description: Installing {prod-short} on Minikube with {identity-provider} as the OIDC provider
```

:keywords: overview, installing-che-on-minikube-keycloak-oidc
:page-aliases: installation-guide:installing-che-on-minikube-keycloak-oidc, overview:installing-che-on-minikube-keycloak-oidc

[id="installing-{prod-id-short}-on-minikube-keycloak-oidc_{context}"]

> = Installing {prod-short} on Minikube with {identity-provider} as OIDC Identity Provider

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
= Installing {prod-short} on Minikube with {identity-provider} as the OIDC provider
```

> This article explains how to create a single-node {kubernetes} cluster with Minikube to deploy {prod-short} and
> configure it to use {identity-provider} as the OIDC identity provider.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can create a single-node {kubernetes} cluster with Minikube to deploy {prod-short} and configure it to use {identity-provider} as the OpenID Connect (OIDC) provider.
```

> WARNING: Remember that single-node {kubernetes} clusters are suited only for testing or development. Do *NOT* use such clusters to run {prod-short} for organizations or developer teams.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
WARNING: Single-node {kubernetes} clusters are suited only for testing or development. Do *NOT* use such clusters to run {prod-short} for organizations or developer teams!
```

.Prerequisites

> * Minikube with {kubernetes} version `{kube-ver-min}` or higher. See link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-minikube/[Installing Minikube].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Minikube with {kubernetes} `{kube-ver-min}` or later. See link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-minikube/[Installing Minikube].
```

  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: keycloak
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: keycloak
        image: quay.io/keycloak/keycloak:18.0.2
        args: ["start-dev"]
        env:
        - name: KEYCLOAK_ADMIN
          value: "admin"
        - name: KEYCLOAK_ADMIN_PASSWORD
          value: "admin"
        - name: KC_PROXY
          value: "edge"
        ports:
        - name: http
          containerPort: 8080
        readinessProbe:
          httpGet:
            path: /realms/master
            port: 8080
---
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  name: keycloak
  namespace: keycloak
  annotations:
    kubernetes.io/ingress.class: nginx
    nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/proxy-connect-timeout: '3600'
    nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/proxy-read-timeout: '3600'
    nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/ssl-redirect: 'true'
spec:
  tls:
    - hosts:
        - keycloak.$(minikube ip).nip.io
      secretName: keycloak.tls
  rules:
  - host: keycloak.$(minikube ip).nip.io
    http:
      paths:
      - path: /
        pathType: Prefix
        backend:
          service:
            name: keycloak
            port:
              number: 8080
EOF
----

> . Save {identity-provider} CA certificate:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Save the {identity-provider} CA certificate:
```

+
[subs="+attributes"]
----
$ {orch-cli} get secret ca.crt -o "jsonpath={.data['ca\.crt']}" -n keycloak | base64 -d > keycloak-ca.crt
----

> . Copy {identity-provider} CA certificate into `minikube`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Copy the {identity-provider} CA certificate into Minikube:
```

+
----
$ minikube ssh sudo "mkdir -p /etc/ca-certificates" && \
  minikube cp keycloak-ca.crt /etc/ca-certificates/keycloak-ca.crt
----

> . Configure `minikube` to use {identity-provider} as OIDC identity provider:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Configure Minikube to use {identity-provider} as the OIDC provider:
```

+
----
$ minikube start \
    --extra-config=apiserver.oidc-issuer-url=https://keycloak.$(minikube ip).nip.io/realms/che \
    --extra-config=apiserver.oidc-username-claim=email \
    --extra-config=apiserver.oidc-client-id=k8s-client \
    --extra-config=apiserver.oidc-ca-file=/etc/ca-certificates/keycloak-ca.crt
----

> . Wait until {identity-provider} pod is ready:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Wait until the {identity-provider} pod is ready:
```

+
[subs="+attributes"]
----
$ {orch-cli} wait --for=condition=ready pod -l app=keycloak -n keycloak --timeout=120s
----

> . Configure {identity-provider} to create realm, client and user:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Configure the {identity-provider} to create the realm, client, and user:
```

+

> IMPORTANT: This step has to be performed every time the minikube cluster is started.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: You must do this each time you start the Minikube cluster.
```

+
[subs="+attributes"]
----
$ {orch-cli} exec deploy/keycloak -n keycloak -- bash -c \
    "/opt/keycloak/bin/kcadm.sh config credentials \
        --server http://localhost:8080 \
        --realm master \
        --user admin  \
        --password admin && \
    /opt/keycloak/bin/kcadm.sh create realms \
        -s realm='che' \
        -s displayName='che' \
        -s enabled=true \
        -s registrationAllowed=false \
        -s resetPasswordAllowed=true && \
    /opt/keycloak/bin/kcadm.sh create clients \
        -r 'che' \
        -s clientId=k8s-client \
        -s id=k8s-client \
        -s redirectUris='[\"*\"]' \
        -s directAccessGrantsEnabled=true \
        -s secret=eclipse-che && \
    /opt/keycloak/bin/kcadm.sh create users \
        -r 'che' \
        -s username=test \
        -s email=\"test@test.com\" \
        -s enabled=true \
        -s emailVerified=true &&  \
    /opt/keycloak/bin/kcadm.sh set-password \
        -r 'che' \
        --username test \
        --new-password test"
----

> . Copy {identity-provider} CA certificate into {prod-namespace}:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Copy the {identity-provider} CA certificate into the `{prod-namespace}` namespace:
```

+
[subs="+attributes"]
----
$ {orch-cli} create namespace {prod-namespace} &&  \
{orch-cli} create configmap keycloak-certs \
    --from-file=keycloak-ca.crt=keycloak-ca.crt \
    -n {prod-namespace} && \
{orch-cli} label configmap keycloak-certs \
    app.kubernetes.io/part-of=che.eclipse.org \
    app.kubernetes.io/component=ca-bundle \
    -n {prod-namespace}
----

> . Prepare `CheCluster` patch:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Prepare the `CheCluster` patch:
```

+
[subs="+attributes"]
----
$ cat > che-patch.yaml << EOF
kind: CheCluster
apiVersion: org.eclipse.che/v2
spec:
  networking:
    auth:
      oAuthClientName: k8s-client
      oAuthSecret: eclipse-che
      identityProviderURL: "https://keycloak.$(minikube ip).nip.io/realms/che"
  components:
    cheServer:
      extraProperties:
        CHE_OIDC_USERNAME__CLAIM: email
EOF
----

> . Create the {prod-short} instance with {prod-cli}:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Create the {prod-short} instance with `{prod-cli}`:
```

+
[subs="+attributes"]
----
$ {prod-cli} server:deploy --platform k8s --domain $(minikube ip).nip.io --che-operator-cr-patch-yaml che-patch.yaml --skip-cert-manager
----
+

> or using link:https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/eclipse-che/eclipse-che[{prod}] Helm Charts:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, use the link:https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/eclipse-che/eclipse-che[{prod}] Helm Charts:
```

+
[subs="+attributes"]
----
$ helm install che \
    --namespace eclipse-che \
    --set networking.domain=$(minikube ip).nip.io \
    --set networking.auth.oAuthSecret=eclipse-che \
    --set networking.auth.oAuthClientName=k8s-client \
    --set networking.auth.identityProviderURL=https://keycloak.$(minikube ip).nip.io/realms/che . && \
  sleep 5s && \
  {orch-cli} patch checluster/eclipse-che --patch '{"spec": {"components": {"cheServer": {"extraProperties": {"CHE_OIDC_USERNAME__CLAIM": "email"}}}}}' --type=merge -n eclipse-che
----

.Verification steps

. Verify the {prod-short} instance status:
+
[subs="+attributes,+quotes"]
----
$ {prod-cli} server:status
----

. Navigate to the {prod-short} cluster instance:
+
[subs="+attributes,+quotes"]
----
$ {prod-cli} dashboard:open
----

> . Login to {prod-short} instance with Username: `test` and Password: `test`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Log in to the {prod-short} instance with *Username:* `test` and *Password:* `test`.
```
